Hello and welcome.
In this workshop, we're going to be taking a look at the My Math system, stepping into what is a pretty
simple example, just getting us reacquainted with the basics of unit testing.
So in this demo you can use the Core Sample project to follow along.
We're going to be opening up the unity editor, opening up that core sample project, and then we'll
open and play some scenes here.
We're going to be looking at the My Math system as well as the test behind it, and we'll do a recap
of unit testing, just kind of talking about whatever basic concepts I see in there and think to mention.
And we'll also talk about parameterized values, which is an intermediate way that you can approach
testing.
And it's a good additional skill to have as you approach unit testing.
Let's dive in.
So here I'm inside the unity editor I've opened them my math system example.
Let's just give the scene itself a play.
Sometimes in these workshops the scene is more exciting.
This one not so exciting.
We'll go ahead and hit play down here in the bottom window, we see some simple text that's helping
us understand we're in the unit testing demo, and we're going to just play the scene and view the console.
So let's look at the console.
The console says this scene has no UI.
See the unity console here we are in the console.
Really.
It's just going to show us a value that's been spit out after a successful operation.
So this would, in real production code, be a much more interesting scene.
Perhaps there's actually the game menu or the game play happening here.
This is quite a lean scene here where there's not much to see, but you can imagine that that could
be.
It's not particularly important that there be a runtime scene for the testing sake.
I just want to often talk about the balance between here's your production code doing its production
thing.
And then over here is the test code doing its test thing.
So production code, we always experience that by hitting play on a unity scene just like this.
And to do our unit testing we do something different.
What we do here is we look at the test runner window.
We explore the category appropriate to what we want to look at here.
We're just looking at the my math system.
And then we hit let's see.
Let's just do the edit mode task.
We'll do run all here and all the tests run just like that.
Now it didn't actually run the scene.
It's just running kind of off on the side in its own little universe, running those tests inside an
edit mode.
So edit mode tests talking a little bit about the difference there.
Edit mode tests run in edit mode, which in unity there's two primary modes.
Basically, from the moment you hit the play button to the moment you hit the play button, that is
play mode.
That's generally where the user experiences the unity game.
Any anytime we're not in that mode, we're in edit mode sitting right here, we're in edit mode.
These tests are run in edit mode because they don't necessarily need all the complexity of a runtime
scene.
This helps us have a more simple little isolated area where these codes run.
Now sometimes you need the conveniences of monobehaviours and runtime functionality.
That's where the play mode comes into into uses.
And here we've got some play mode tests as well.
So each time I click one of these checkboxes, you can see it's showing us some slightly different lists
of what we've got available.
So here in play mode I'm going to hit run all.
And here it's actually creating a brand new scene, running a runtime scene that's just for demo sake
with whatever test code I've got.
And then returns us back to the original scene we were in.
If we didn't have the scene saved, it would prompt us and say, hey, you're about to run a play mode
test.
We're going to temporarily leave your scene.
Do you want to save your scene first?
Generally, that's a good idea, so look out for that.
Now let's look at the source code.
Let's first look at the runtime production code.
So we'll open up the My Math system example.
Each of these workshops has, generally speaking one game object with one example script that kicks
it all off.
So when we look at that, here we are in the code editor and we can see the complete my math system
example.
Now this is a monobehaviour because I want to have the conveniences of code sitting on a game object.
And then inside the awake.
Here I'm going to simulate some production code.
Now it's very lean, there's not much to it, and it kind of looks the same as the test we're about
to look at, because I create the class from scratch and then I call a method on it, and then I show
the results.
But it's important to know that in a production example, in a real game project, this equivalent would
be many classes and all the scenes and all the prefabs and all the complexity you would generally have
in your project.
But here I'm keeping it purposely very lean.
So notice what we do here.
We create the my math system.
We grab a couple of ints and populate them with the values five and ten.
And then we call the my Math system.
And we pass in the five and ten together.
And then here we show the result.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So here I hit play.
And down here in the console window we see the result is 15.
Now, I like the simplicity of this coding example, because it starts us thinking about in a world
where unit tests never existed, how would I go about being sure that this code is functional?
Well, perhaps this code of my math system is used in many, many places of your game, and you simply
any time you want to see and validate that this system is working well, you just play the game and
your game might be several minutes long, or it could be several hours long.
And this particular system that's under test could be used throughout so many different places, depending
on different user behavior and input and situations.
Perhaps the time of day would be matter.
And so it's difficult for you to know am I really testing it in raw isolation?
So one first move I could do if I wanted to do some validation is I could copy this here, paste it
here.
And call this here and test.
Well, what if it was six?
And what if it was 11?
A to, B to.
So now I'm testing not a unit test, but I'm just validating two different examples here.
So I'm doing this one first and I'm doing that in second.
Now this is called user testing or play mode testing or integration testing where I'm actually running
production code.
And I'm just trying it out as a user, hoping that I accidentally ask it to do a bunch of different
operations, see that none of them fail.
But you could imagine that what I'm doing here is adding stuff that I don't really want for the end
user experience.
I'm just trying to give myself a little bit more confidence in my own code by calling some functionality
extra times.
You might also set a boolean somewhere in your project that says like is debug mode is true, and then
you throughout your production code.
If that's the situation, you'll do a little extra testing.
Now that's not bad.
In certain situations, it can definitely help you, but let's look at how much better the situation
can be.
If instead of doing this, I run unit tests.
So here's where this project the code sits.
In this project we've got the My Math system, My Math system example, which we've looked at.
The structure of that and the way that they work together is talked about earlier in the course.
But we have one editor test and one runtime test that we'll talk about.
Again, any editor test is going to run an edit mode, and it's generally ideal for things that do not
use unity specific classes like Monobehaviour.
Monobehaviour is designed only to run in its fullest way in play mode.
So here it's not too appropriate.
So.
But for simple tests like the one that we've got here, it's great.
The runtime area here where we have the play mode test would be a great place.
And each of these workshops I do one of each just so you can see the differences.
But it's important to think that in certain situations, depending on what you're testing, probably
a unit test in edit mode is more appropriate in this situation.
That's definitely the case later when we're talking about moving with input and doing something with
physics, maybe the play mode test is required there, because input and physics are really designed
as play mode experiences.
So it's important to know that distinction.
And I'll bring it up here and there.
So let's look at the my math system test.
And see how that is organized.
So here, notice that the My Math system test has a few different.
Has a few different methods under it.
Each of the names that we see here are the names of the test methods.
So let's start with the first one.
The convention that I like to use is followed here, and we'll go into it in the code I generally put
first, what method are we testing, what are we expecting and then what's the situation.
So here it says the add method is what we're testing.
We expect the result will be 15 when we pass in five and ten.
So a nice shortcut here is that as you're running any tests you can just double click it to run it again.
And then I can right click it.
Sorry, I was in play mode.
Double click it and it runs again.
Great.
Still green.
And I can right click it and choose open source code.
That's an easy way to get right to the right class and right to the right method.
Here again is that method name that we saw.
Again add result is 15 when five and ten.
The reason that that's important is that if you have lots of test classes with lots of test methods,
and I hope that you do in your project in order to reason which in the test runner is which in the code
base here, it's nice to have that consistent naming.
So here what we do, we do the arrange, act and assert methodology.
In the arrange.
What we're going to do first is just create a fresh instance of what we want to test.
That way we know it hasn't been sitting around, doesn't have any old data inside of it.
It's always a good practice.
Then we're going to act upon that.
This is like, what is the one method if you can get away with it?
Maybe two methods that really do the testing.
But one method is ideal.
Here we're adding together five and ten.
And then in the assert we're going to use this assert language.
The assert class has a certain structure to it where you say I assert that something is something.
And you can look at the documentation on that to see some variety of ways that you can format that.
But often I use is equal to or is true or is false.
So those are ones that you'll see quite commonly here.
So when I run that because the code runs correctly it adds five and ten to be 15.
That's it.
We're able to do that.
Now remember the example I was giving in the production code.
What if you wanted to test five and ten and then test six and 11 and then test seven and 12 or whatever
combinations?
The better you get at testing, you'll realize how many tests you really need to provide adequate coverage.
There's a lot of an art and a science around what's the minimum number of tests you can provide that
maximize your impact, and the code coverage that you have.
So one of the things that I wanted to talk about as part of this particular workshop is what are called
parameterized tests.
So instead of just copying this one, pasting it below, and tweaking the values to add together six
and 11 or 0 and negative ten, we can ask unity to run the same exact test, but passing in some different
values.
There's a lot of different options you have here.
I'm just showing one of them.
But let's take a look down here.
We say, and together that we assume the result is correct when these values.
So the method names a little bit more vague because it's parameterized, I don't necessarily know.
Is this going to test five and ten is 15.
Notice here instead of the what I did before which was declaring five and ten.
In the body of the method I use this particular language, I use something called value source.
And then I pass it in.
What unity does is it populates this first passes values in here.
So let's say it's five.
Then it grabs another value source here.
Let's say that one is ten and it assumes that they are five plus ten added together.
So each time it runs, it's going to do the equivalent of the last test that we saw.
But instead of being hard coded to just one set of values, it's going to mix it up and show a variety
of them.
Now again, there's lots of different ways you can format this.
So you want to look at the documentation for parameterized tests in unity.
But let's look at my specific case here.
Those value sources values A and b.
They just refer to a couple arrays that I've got up here.
And what it's going to do is just step through and it's going to test one and one, negative two and
negative two, negative three and negative three and pass them in.
You could organize them any way you want and test different scenarios where you maybe do seven, 11
and 12.
You test anything you want.
Now you don't have to test infinite amounts there.
This is where that art and science comes along.
You might want to test a couple of negative values zero in some scenarios and a couple of positive values.
Maybe what you're doing is not math based and you want to think about it another way, but what you're
looking for what are called corner cases.
So for example, if you were doing a division method and you wanted to test it mathematically, there's
a challenge about dividing by zero.
So you would want to see that you pass in zero and handle that elegantly.
You really need to know the specific domain that your production code lies in, in order to know how
to test it.
But here a couple of each positive and negative and stuff like that.
So let's look at how that looks in the unity editor.
So notice what it does here.
It actually runs 49 tests based on all the combinations that we've got there.
So it shows you when values are and then it passes in.
So that's really nice.
Now as you're looking at this output you might realize oh it's going to be important to me to test 100
and -100.
Great.
Then just go back and add those sample values in if you want to do other things instead of just a hard
coded list.
If you want to select a random values, there's lots of other options you have there.
Again, do some research on parameterized tests.
You can dig into the play mode test as well if you want, but since that's going to be more interesting
in other examples, we'll move on and conclude this one of the workshops.
Thanks.